Hello. This is just a short presentation to give you six basic grammar

tips on which you can build your other academic skills to improve

your academic writing. I've chosen these particular

six grammar issues because I think these are the issues that students

find most difficult. So starting with long sentences, I'll start

with reading outloud. This example, sustainable development

refers to maintaining development over time, although by the early 1990s, more than

70 definitions of sustainable development were in circulation. But definitions

are important despite a number, because they are the basis on which the means for achieving sustainable development in the

future can be built. Forty nine words. You probably heard

me sort of gasping for breath in the middle. And if I'd been reading that sentence

for the first time, I think I would have completely lost track of what it was talking about.

So forty nine words is too long. How long is an ideal sentence?

Well, how long is a piece of string? I think there's a lot of research

out there that says an average sentences, 20 words long, but that means

the average so can be more or it can be less. So how

would you divide that sentence? Well, you could divide it just in

two. So the first sentence would be all about

sustainable development. You would join it. The second sentence with the word,

however. And the second sentence that the subject, the main subject would be definitions.

Now, I think that works very well. Both those sentences are short

enough to be able to follow what they're talking about. But equally,

they are both well over 20 words. Now, you could divide

it into three. So the second example starts with

quite a short sentence. Sustainable development refers to maintaining development over time.

That's only eight words. But I think that that works.

You've then got another fairly short sentence with the linked word, however. And the

last one a little bit longer with the topic of definitions. So

divide very long sentences, but also avoid

very short sentences, because when you read it out loud,

you will realise that short sentences makes it very sort of stop, go, stop, go

feeling and you want your writing to flow.

The simple way to rectify a series of very short sentences

is to put a conjunction in between and join them up with a conjunction. It can be

even just a simple conjunction like the word. And so

the message here is avoid very long sentences where you just lose

track of what sentence is about, but also avoid a series of very

short sentences that make it very stop going, stop. And you can

join them up using conjunctions. Moving onto paragraphs.

It is very common to see. Paragraphs which are much

too short. Now, one or two or even three sentences never make

a paragraph. A paragraph needs to be long enough to discuss its topic.

Each paragraph has a topic. And in an academic essay,

you will need to discuss or analyse or explore

that topic. So that paragraph needs to be long enough to

do that effectively. Now, if you find that

in your writing, you are straying from that one topic and you're bringing in

other topics. It is likely that your paragraph will end up being too long.

But if that's the case, you need to sort out the topics and make sure

that each paragraph has one topic. So the message

here is a paragraph is not long enough with one or two sentences.

It needs to be long enough to discuss the one topic belonging to that paragraph.

Moving on to subjects and verbs, again, I'm going to read this example out loud

definitions. Despite a large number, because they are the basis on which the means for achieving sustainable

development in the future can be built. Are important.

Now, I have lost track of what what is important. So

I have to look back to the beginning of the sentence to find that its definitions

that are important definitions is the subject is the

birth, and they need to be closer to each other because otherwise

you you lose track of what is important.

So how would I rewrite that sentence? Well, I could put

the subject and the verb right next door to each other. Definitions are important.

They don't have to be right next to each other. They can have a short

phrase or clause in between. So the second example is definitions.

Despite that, a large number are important. That's fine. I haven't forgotten

what's important. I haven't forgotten that is definitions, because it's just got a short

phrase in between. No, it could have a short clause in between. But they do need

to be relatively near to each other. And if you

read out your work outloud, you will be able to realise

whether you have put the verb too far away from its subject or not.

Prepositions. Those annoying little words that seem unimportant and yet are very

important, prepositions usually imply place or time.

And I'd given an example of some at the bottom of that slide. But there are

many more. I've also given an example of three very simple sentences

using a preposition. But for a more complicated

sentence, it is very common to see students putting

a preposition at the end of the sentence, sort of hanging on the end

with with no noun or pronoun to attach it.

Now, if you're talking to a friend, that is where you would put a preposition,

so you would say to a friend. Who are you going to the cinema with and

that with is on its own, hanging on at the end of the sentence. If you were writing that

in an academic style, you would say, with whom

are you going to the cinema? Well, of course, you're never going to say that to a friend. It sounds silly,

but you are good to write it in an essay. So how would you

rewrite that example? You would say definitions are the basis

on which means for achieving sustainable development in the future could be built.

So don't leave a preposition hanging. On its own. At the end of a sentence.

It needs a noun or a pronoun. It can't survive

on its own. Moving on to conjunctions now, we've already

mentioned conjunctions is a good way to join up short

sentences. Sometimes the use of a conjunction is not

so obvious. And in the example here, it's

not obvious that it needs a conjunction until you really outline perhaps

by the early 1990s, more than 70 definitions of sustainable development were in circulation.

And definitions are important. Despite that. No. Now, that second

sentence, it's only joined by a comma. It could almost

have a full stop, would be a completely new sentence on its own. But then

it would be a fairly short sentence. So the easy way to get round

that is to use a conjunction and join the two sentences

I've used to do in conjunction, although it could possibly have been and.

But the important thing is that you needed something there. Otherwise, it was

just jumping from one sentence to another. And again,

if you read it out loud, I hope that you will be able to identify the need

for a conjunction to keep your writing flowing.

Verb Tense says. Now, academic writing is usually in the

simple present tense, even if it is referring to research

that has been done several years earlier. Now, there are

exceptions to that. If you are referring specifically to the past and you want

to make a point that is in the past or if the research

is referring to the future, and then you would use a futuristic verb.

But normally the rule is the simple present tense.

So looking at this example below, the first verb is refers simple, present

tense over this citation is 2016. So that

is the normal academic convention. The next verb were

were in circulation is making a point that the

research is looking way back in the 1990s. So the past

tense is the relevant verb there. You'll see the citation is 2009,

but it is referring to the nineteen nineties. So it's making a point that it's quite old.

The next two verbs are important and are the basis. Again,

back to the usual rule, a simple present tense with the citation

being 2016. However, also into that research

comes of a reference to the future, sustainable development in the future

can be built. So that needs a futuristic verb.

So the normal convention is a simple present tense, even if these citations and references

are in the past. But again, if you read your work out loud,

you will be able to assess if the rule needs to

be broken and put the verb in the in the past or even in the future.

So some lost tips never use the word I or we, unless

you're writing reflectively or if the assignment risks specifically tells you to do so.

So make all your writing impersonal. So instead of I use the library database

to research, the library database was used to preserve totally personal.

Lasley. Avoid colloquial language. Now,

I've already referred to colloquial language with reference to

the use of prepositions. Who are you going to the cinema with? In academic

terms, that is, with whom are you going to the cinema? So that is

a colloquial terminology to avoid but also avoid colloquial

vocabulary. So sustainable development is great for the world. Great

is very colloquial. So I've put instead beneficial. Or it could be foreign teachers.

What ever is appropriate? It is really, really

helpful to read your work out loud.

Then you can very often spot the grammar

grammatical challenges that you have met and you

can assess where to put it. Right. But you're not on your

own. There is lots of support, academic skills offers lots of support with

your academic requirements. The best way to contact

us is through my Napier student portal. And then you can see what's available for

you. And you can see that also that we have an email address where you can contact us.

So good luck with your writing and doing your studies.

